In the last video you saw
how very deep neural networks
can have the problems of
vanishing and exploding gradients.
It turns out that a partial solution to this,
doesn't solve it entirely but helps a lot,
is better or more careful choice of the
random initialization for your neural network.
To understand this, let's start with the
example of initializing the ways for
a single neuron, and then we're go on to
generalize this to a deep network.
Let's go through this with an example with
just a single neuron, and then
we'll talk about the deep net later.
So with a single neuron, you might input four
features, x1 through x4, and then you have some
a=g(z) and then it outputs some y.
And later on for a deeper net,
you know these inputs will be right,
some layer a(l), but for now
let's just call this x for now.
So z is going to be equal to
w1x1 + w2x2 +... + I guess WnXn.
And let's set b=0 so, you know,
let's just ignore b for now.
So in order to make z
not blow up and not become
too small, you notice that
the larger n is,
the smaller you want Wi to be, right?
Because z is the sum of the WiXi. And
so if you're adding up a lot of these terms,
you want each of these terms to be smaller.
One reasonable thing to do would be to
set the variance of Wi to be equal to 1 over n,
where n is the number of input features
that's going into a neuron.
So in practice, what you can do is set
the weight matrix W for a certain layer
to be np.random.randn you know,
and then whatever the shape of the
matrix is for this out here,
and then times square root of 1
over the number of features that
I fed into each neuron in layer l.
So there's going to be n(l-1)
because that's the number of units that
I'm feeding into each of the units
in layer l. It turns out that if you're using
a ReLu activation function that,
rather than 1 over n it turns out that,
set in the variance of 2 over n
works a little bit better.
So you often see that in initialization,
especially if you're using
a ReLu activation function.
So if gl(z) is ReLu(z),
oh and it depends on how familiar you are
with random variables.
It turns out that something,
a Gaussian random variable and then
multiplying it by a square root of this,
that sets the variance to be quoted this way,
to be 2 over n. And the reason I went from
n to this n superscript l-1 was,
in this example with logistic regression which is at
n input features, but the more general case
layer l would have n(l-1) inputs
each of the units in that layer.
So if the input features of activations are
roughly mean 0 and standard variance
and variance 1 then this would cause z to also
take on a similar scale. And this doesn't solve,
but it definitely helps reduce the vanishing,
exploding gradients problem,
because it's trying to set each of
the weight matrices w, you know,
so that it's not too much
bigger than 1 and not too much less than 1
so it doesn't explode or vanish too quickly.
I've just mention some other variants.
The version we just described is assuming
a ReLu activation function
and this by a paper by [inaudible].
A few other variants,
if you are using a TanH activation function
then there's a paper that shows that
instead of using the constant 2,
it's better use the constant 1
and so 1 over this
instead of 2. And so you multiply it by
the square root of this.
So this square root term will replace
this term and you use this
if you're using a TanH activation function.
This is called Xavier initialization.
And another version we're taught by
Yoshua Bengio and his colleagues,
you might see in some papers,
but is to use this formula,
which you know has some other
theoretical justification,
but I would say if you're using a
ReLu activation function,
which is really the most common
activation function,
I would use this formula.
If you're using TanH you could try
this version instead, and some authors will also
use this. But in practice I think all of these
formulas just give you a starting point.
It gives you a default value to use
for the variance of
the initialization of your weight matrices.
If you wish the variance here,
this variance parameter could be
another thing that you could
tune with your hyperparameters.
So you could have
another parameter that multiplies into
this formula and tune
that multiplier as part of your
hyperparameter surge.
Sometimes tuning the hyperparameter
has a modest size effect.
It's not one of the first hyperparameters
I would usually try
to tune, but I've also seen some
problems where tuning this
helps a reasonable amount. But this is
usually lower down for me in terms
of how important it is relative to the
other hyperparameters you can tune.
So I hope that gives you some intuition
about the problem of vanishing or exploding
gradients as well as choosing a
reasonable scaling for
how you initialize the weights.
Hopefully that makes your weights
not explode too quickly
and not decay to zero too quickly,
so you can
train a reasonably deep network without
the weights or the gradients
exploding or vanishing too much.
When you train deep networks,
this is another trick that will help
you make your neural networks
trained much more quickly.